Benchmark: 2
Idea: causal inference from observational healthcare data under unmeasured confounding
Started: 2026-09-04T15:03:18+09:00

Found 100 unique candidate papers.
Showing top 20 ranked results for: causal inference from observational healthcare data under unmeasured confounding (hybrid)

1. Multiply Robust Causal Inference with Double-Negative Control Adjustment for Categorical Unmeasured Confounding
   Authors: Xu Shi, Wang Miao, Jennifer C. Nelson, Eric J. Tchetgen Tchetgen
   Year: 2020
   Final relevance: 1.000
   Citations: 104
   Link: https://doi.org/10.1111/rssb.12361
   Abstract: Unmeasured confounding is a threat to causal inference in observational studies. In recent years, the use of negative controls to mitigate unmeasured confounding has gained increasing recognition and popularity. Negative controls have a long-standing tradition in laboratory sciences and epidemiology to rule out non-causal explanations, although they have been used primarily for bias detection. Recently, Miao and colleagues have described sufficient conditions under which a pair of negative control exposure and outcome variables can be used to identify non-parametrically the average treatment effect (ATE) from observational data subject to uncontrolled confounding. We establish non-parametric identification of the ATE under weaker conditions in the case of categorical unmeasured confounding and negative control variables. We also provide a general semiparametric framework for obtaining inferences about the ATE while leveraging information about a possibly large number of measured covariates. In particular, we derive the semiparametric efficiency bound in the non-parametric model, and we propose multiply robust and locally efficient estimators when non-parametric estimation may not be feasible. We assess the finite sample performance of our methods in extensive simulation studies. Finally, we illustrate our methods with an application to the post-licensure surveillance of vaccine safety among children.

2. PS1-11: A Comparison of Electronic Medical Records vs. Claims Data for Rheumatoid Arthritis Patients in a Large Healthcare System: An Exploratory Analysis
   Authors: Daniel Maeng, Joseph A. Boscarino, Walter F. Stewart, Xiaowei Yan, Nancy Steigerwalt
   Year: 2014
   Final relevance: 0.945
   Citations: 8
   Link: https://doi.org/10.3121/cmr.2014.1250.ps1-11
   Abstract: Background/Aims: Comparative effectiveness research (CER) investigates the effects of treatments and practices, thus requires causal inference. Routine data such as billing, pharmacy or EHR, while often incomplete on important confounding variables, are the usual sources of information for nonexperimental CER. The lack of randomization introduces important considerations regarding uncontrolled confounding, especially in large datasets, which potentially magnify systematic error. Yet, quantitative bias analysis in CER is not common practice. In this paper we formalize and demonstrate easy-to-implement record-level simulation techniques for analysis of uncontrolled confounding in cancer treatment CER. Methods: We use recent advancements from the causal theory and risk analysis literature, specifically directed acyclic graphs (DAGs), and Monte-Carlo simulation techniques to introduce a novel form of record-level missing variable imputation that can be implemented during the core data analysis stage, making bias analysis more accessible using standard statistical packages. Further, our methods take into account varying levels of uncontrolled confounding by research center, or other clustering variable that may predict the level of unknown information in the dataset, and are specifically designed for implementation in large datasets, or data from multiple sources. We demonstrate these methods with two example sensitivity analyses of uncontrolled confounding in cancer treatment CER. Results: Our methodology highlights the underlying causal model assumed for the main analysis in CER. Our technique uses the observed data lacking important confounding variables and informed estimates of the unmeasured variables to impute missing variables. The new variables now have a joint distribution with the observed data that would have been the case had they been observed fully under the assumed interrelationships. This technique is intuitively in line with the missing data framework and inference using partially observed distributions. Conclusions: Sensitivity analysis for uncontrolled confounding is feasible and indispensable for CER. Unlike existing formula-intensive external adjustment techniques, the new technique can be implemented during core data analysis, is not outcome model specific, is at most semiparametric and requires no esoteric software. Quantitative uncertainty analysis should be routine practice for CER in large observational data sources. Flexible methods accessible to all researchers should be a priority in this growing area of research.

3. Causal inference with missing exposure information: Methods and applications to an obstetric study
   Authors: Zhiwei Zhang, Wei Liu, Bo Zhang, Li Tang, Jun Zhang
   Year: 2013
   Final relevance: 0.938
   Citations: 23
   Link: https://doi.org/10.1177/0962280213513758
   Abstract: Causal inference in observational studies is frequently challenged by the occurrence of missing data, in addition to confounding. Motivated by the Consortium on Safe Labor, a large observational study of obstetric labor practice and birth outcomes, this article focuses on the problem of missing exposure information in a causal analysis of observational data. This problem can be approached from different angles (i.e. missing covariates and causal inference), and useful methods can be obtained by drawing upon the available techniques and insights in both areas. In this article, we describe and compare a collection of methods based on different modeling assumptions, under standard assumptions for missing data (i.e. missing-at-random and positivity) and for causal inference with complete data (i.e. no unmeasured confounding and another positivity assumption). These methods involve three models: one for treatment assignment, one for the dependence of outcome on treatment and covariates, and one for the missing data mechanism. In general, consistent estimation of causal quantities requires correct specification of at least two of the three models, although there may be some flexibility as to which two models need to be correct. Such flexibility is afforded by doubly robust estimators adapted from the missing covariates literature and the literature on causal inference with complete data, and by a newly developed triply robust estimator that is consistent if any two of the three models are correct. The methods are applied to the Consortium on Safe Labor data and compared in a simulation study mimicking the Consortium on Safe Labor.

4. A comparison of confounder selection and adjustment methods for estimating causal effects using large healthcare databases
   Authors: Imane Benasseur, Denis Talbot, Madéleine Durand, Anne Holbrook, Alexis Matteau, Brian J. Potter, Christel Renoux, Mireille E. Schnitzer, Jean‐Éric Tarride, Jason R. Guertin
   Year: 2021
   Final relevance: 0.934
   Citations: 17
   Link: https://doi.org/10.1002/pds.5403
   Abstract: PURPOSE: Confounding adjustment is required to estimate the effect of an exposure on an outcome in observational studies. However, variable selection and unmeasured confounding are particularly challenging when analyzing large healthcare data. Machine learning methods may help address these challenges. The objective was to evaluate the capacity of such methods to select confounders and reduce unmeasured confounding bias. METHODS: A simulation study with known true effects was conducted. Completely synthetic and partially synthetic data incorporating real large healthcare data were generated. We compared Bayesian adjustment for confounding (BAC), generalized Bayesian causal effect estimation (GBCEE), Group Lasso and Doubly robust estimation, high-dimensional propensity score (hdPS), and scalable collaborative targeted maximum likelihood algorithms. For the hdPS, two adjustment approaches targeting the effect in the whole population were considered: Full matching and inverse probability weighting. RESULTS: In scenarios without hidden confounders, most methods were essentially unbiased. The bias and variance of the hdPS varied considerably according to the number of variables selected by the algorithm. In scenarios with hidden confounders, substantial bias reduction was achieved by using machine-learning methods to identify proxies as compared to adjusting only by observed confounders. hdPS and Group Lasso performed poorly in the partially synthetic simulation. BAC, GBCEE, and scalable collaborative-targeted maximum likelihood algorithms performed particularly well. CONCLUSIONS: Machine learning can help to identify measured confounders in large healthcare databases. They can also capitalize on proxies of unmeasured confounders to substantially reduce residual confounding bias.

5. Assessing causal treatment effect estimation when using large observational datasets
   Authors: Ellie John, Keith R. Abrams, Christopher E. Brightling, Nuala A. Sheehan
   Year: 2019
   Final relevance: 0.902
   Citations: 17
   Link: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12874-019-0858-x
   Abstract: BACKGROUND: Recently, there has been a heightened interest in developing and evaluating different methods for analysing observational data. This has been driven by the increased availability of large data resources such as Electronic Health Record (EHR) data alongside known limitations and changing characteristics of randomised controlled trials (RCTs). A wide range of methods are available for analysing observational data. However, various, sometimes strict, and often unverifiable assumptions must be made in order for the resulting effect estimates to have a causal interpretation. In this paper we will compare some common approaches to estimating treatment effects from observational data in order to highlight the importance of considering, and justifying, the relevant assumptions prior to conducting an observational analysis. METHODS: A simulation study was conducted based upon a small cohort of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Two-stage least squares instrumental variables, propensity score, and linear regression models were compared under a range of different scenarios including different strengths of instrumental variable and unmeasured confounding. The effects of violating the assumptions of the instrumental variables analysis were also assessed. Sample sizes of up to 200,000 patients were considered. RESULTS: Two-stage least squares instrumental variable methods can yield unbiased treatment effect estimates in the presence of unmeasured confounding provided the sample size is sufficiently large. Adjusting for measured covariates in the analysis reduces the variability in the two-stage least squares estimates. In the simulation study, propensity score methods produced very similar results to linear regression for all scenarios. A weak instrument or strong unmeasured confounding led to an increase in uncertainty in the two-stage least squares instrumental variable effect estimates. A violation of the instrumental variable assumptions led to bias in the two-stage least squares effect estimates. Indeed, these were sometimes even more biased than those from a naïve linear regression model. CONCLUSIONS: Instrumental variable methods can perform better than naïve regression and propensity scores. However, the assumptions need to be carefully considered and justified prior to conducting an analysis or performance may be worse than if the problem of unmeasured confounding had been ignored altogether.

6. The impact of unmeasured confounding on causal inferencein observational studies: A plasmode simulation studyof targeted maximum likelihood estimation
   Authors: Lateef Babatunde Amusa, Temesgen Zewotir, Delia North
   Year: 2022
   Final relevance: 0.899
   Citations: 0
   Link: https://doi.org/10.14456/sjst-psu.2022.65
   Abstract: Unmeasured confounding can cause considerable problems for causal inference in observational studies and threaten the validity of the estimates of causal treatment effects. We investigate the robustness of a relatively new causal inference technique, targeted maximum likelihood estimation (TMLE), in terms of its robustness against the impact of unmeasured confounders. We benchmarked TMLE's performance with the inverse probability of treatment weighting (IPW) method. We utilized a plasmode-like simulation based on variables and parameters from the Study to Understand Prognoses and Preferences for Outcomes and Risks of Treatments (SUPPORT). We evaluated the accuracy and precision of the estimated treatment effects. Though TMLE performed better in most of the scenarios considered, our simulation study results suggest that both methods performed reasonably well in estimating the marginal odds ratio in the presence of unmeasured confounding. Nonetheless, the only remedy to unobserved confounding when making causal inference is by controlling for as many as possible confounders because not even TMLE can provide a safeguard against bias from unmeasured confounders.

7. Causal inference from experiment and observation
   Authors: Marcel Zwahlen, Georgia Salanti
   Year: 2017
   Final relevance: 0.893
   Citations: 10
   Link: https://doi.org/10.1136/eb-2017-102859
   Abstract: Results from well-conducted randomised controlled studies should ideally inform on the comparative merits of treatment choices for a health condition. In the absence of this, one attempts to use evidence from the impact of treatment when administered according to decisions of the physicians and the patients (observational evidence). Naïve comparisons between treatment options using observational evidence will lead to biased results. Under certain conditions, however, it is possible to obtain valid estimates of the comparative merits of different treatments from observational data. Causal inference can be conceptualised as a framework aiming to provide valid information about causal effects of treatments using observational evidence. It can be viewed as a missing data problem in which each patient has two outcomes: the observed outcome under the treatment actually received and a counterfactual (unobserved) outcome had the patient received a different treatment. Methodological developments over the last decades clarified the appropriate conditions and methods to obtain valid comparisons. This article provides an introduction to some of these methods.

8. Copula-based Sensitivity Analysis for Multi-Treatment Causal Inference with Unobserved Confounding
   Authors: Jiajing Zheng, Alexander D’Amour, Alexander Franks
   Year: 2021
   Final relevance: 0.885
   Citations: 4
   Link: https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2102.09412
   Abstract: Recent work has focused on the potential and pitfalls of causal identification in observational studies with multiple simultaneous treatments. Building on previous work, we show that even if the conditional distribution of unmeasured confounders given treatments were known exactly, the causal effects would not in general be identifiable, although they may be partially identified. Given these results, we propose a sensitivity analysis method for characterizing the effects of potential unmeasured confounding, tailored to the multiple treatment setting, that can be used to characterize a range of causal effects that are compatible with the observed data. Our method is based on a copula factorization of the joint distribution of outcomes, treatments, and confounders, and can be layered on top of arbitrary observed data models. We propose a practical implementation of this approach making use of the Gaussian copula, and establish conditions under which causal effects can be bounded. We also describe approaches for reasoning about effects, including calibrating sensitivity parameters, quantifying robustness of effect estimates, and selecting models that are most consistent with prior hypotheses.

9. Multiple Causal Inference with Latent Confounding
   Authors: Rajesh Ranganath, Adler Perotte
   Year: 2018
   Final relevance: 0.868
   Citations: 23
   Link: https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.1805.08273
   Abstract: Causal inference from observational data requires assumptions. These assumptions range from measuring confounders to identifying instruments. Traditionally, causal inference assumptions have focused on estimation of effects for a single treatment. In this work, we construct techniques for estimation with multiple treatments in the presence of unobserved confounding. We develop two assumptions based on shared confounding between treatments and independence of treatments given the confounder. Together, these assumptions lead to a confounder estimator regularized by mutual information. For this estimator, we develop a tractable lower bound. To recover treatment effects, we use the residual information in the treatments independent of the confounder. We validate on simulations and an example from clinical medicine.

10. Adjusting for indirectly measured confounding using large-scale propensity score
   Authors: Linying Zhang, Zhaoran Wang, Martijn J. Schuemie, David M. Blei, George Hripcsak
   Year: 2022
   Final relevance: 0.852
   Citations: 52
   Link: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2022.104204
   Abstract: Confounding remains one of the major challenges to causal inference with observational data. This problem is paramount in medicine, where we would like to answer causal questions from large observational datasets like electronic health records (EHRs) and administrative claims. Modern medical data typically contain tens of thousands of covariates. Such a large set carries hope that many of the confounders are directly measured, and further hope that others are indirectly measured through their correlation with measured covariates. How can we exploit these large sets of covariates for causal inference? To help answer this question, this paper examines the performance of the large-scale propensity score (LSPS) approach on causal analysis of medical data. We demonstrate that LSPS may adjust for indirectly measured confounders by including tens of thousands of covariates that may be correlated with them. We present conditions under which LSPS removes bias due to indirectly measured confounders, and we show that LSPS may avoid bias when inadvertently adjusting for variables (like colliders) that otherwise can induce bias. We demonstrate the performance of LSPS with both simulated medical data and real medical data.

11. Adjusting for indirectly measured confounding using large-scale propensity scores
   Authors: Linying Zhang, Zhaoran Wang, Martijn J. Schuemie, David M. Blei, George Hripcsak
   Year: 2021
   Final relevance: 0.848
   Citations: 0
   Link: https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2110.12235
   Abstract: Confounding remains one of the major challenges to causal inference with observational data. This problem is paramount in medicine, where we would like to answer causal questions from large observational datasets like electronic health records (EHRs) and administrative claims. Modern medical data typically contain tens of thousands of covariates. Such a large set carries hope that many of the confounders are directly measured, and further hope that others are indirectly measured through their correlation with measured covariates. How can we exploit these large sets of covariates for causal inference? To help answer this question, this paper examines the performance of the large-scale propensity score (LSPS) approach on causal analysis of medical data. We demonstrate that LSPS may adjust for indirectly measured confounders by including tens of thousands of covariates that may be correlated with them. We present conditions under which LSPS removes bias due to indirectly measured confounders, and we show that LSPS may avoid bias when inadvertently adjusting for variables (like colliders) that otherwise can induce bias. We demonstrate the performance of LSPS with both simulated medical data and real medical data.

12. Adjusting for unmeasured confounding in nonrandomized longitudinal studies: a methodological review
   Authors: Adam Streeter, Nan Lin, Louise Crathorne, Marcela Haasova, Christopher Hyde, David Melzer, William Henley
   Year: 2017
   Final relevance: 0.818
   Citations: 146
   Link: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2017.04.022
   Abstract: OBJECTIVES: Motivated by recent calls to use electronic health records for research, we reviewed the application and development of methods for addressing the bias from unmeasured confounding in longitudinal data. STUDY DESIGN AND SETTING: Methodological review of existing literature. We searched MEDLINE and EMBASE for articles addressing the threat to causal inference from unmeasured confounding in nonrandomized longitudinal health data through quasi-experimental analysis. RESULTS: Among the 121 studies included for review, 84 used instrumental variable analysis (IVA), of which 36 used lagged or historical instruments. Difference-in-differences (DiD) and fixed effects (FE) models were found in 29 studies. Five of these combined IVA with DiD or FE to try to mitigate for time-dependent confounding. Other less frequently used methods included prior event rate ratio adjustment, regression discontinuity nested within pre-post studies, propensity score calibration, perturbation analysis, and negative control outcomes. CONCLUSION: Well-established econometric methods such as DiD and IVA are commonly used to address unmeasured confounding in nonrandomized longitudinal studies, but researchers often fail to take full advantage of available longitudinal information. A range of promising new methods have been developed, but further studies are needed to understand their relative performance in different contexts before they can be recommended for widespread use.

13. Just what the doctor ordered: An evaluation of provider preference-based Instrumental Variable methods in observational studies, with application for comparative effectiveness of type 2 diabetes therapy
   Authors: Laura M. Güdemann, Beverley M. Shields, John Dennis, Jack Bowden
   Year: 2023
   Final relevance: 0.783
   Citations: 0
   Link: https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2308.08020
   Abstract: Instrumental Variables provide a way of addressing bias due to unmeasured confounding when estimating treatment effects using observational data. As instrument prescription preference of individual healthcare providers has been proposed. Because prescription preference is hard to measure and often unobserved, a surrogate measure constructed from available data is often required for the analysis. Different construction methods for this surrogate measure are possible, such as simple rule-based methods which make use of the observed treatment patterns, or more complex model-based methods that employ formal statistical models to explain the treatment behaviour whilst considering measured confounders. The choice of construction method relies on aspects like data availability within provider, missing data in measured confounders, and possible changes in prescription preference over time. In this paper we conduct a comprehensive simulation study to evaluate different construction methods for surrogates of prescription preference under different data conditions, including: different provider sizes, missing covariate data, and change in preference. We also propose a novel model-based construction method to address between provider differences and change in prescription preference. All presented construction methods are exemplified in a case study of the relative glucose lowering effect of two type 2 diabetes treatments in observational data. Our study shows that preference-based Instrumental Variable methods can be a useful tool for causal inference from observational health data. The choice of construction method should be driven by the data condition at hand. Our proposed method is capable of estimating the causal treatment effect without bias in case of sufficient prescription data per provider, changing prescription preference over time and non-ignorable missingness in measured confounders.

14. A Comprehensive Review and Tutorial on Confounding Adjustment Methods for Estimating Treatment Effects Using Observational Data
   Authors: Amy X. Shi, Paul N. Zivich, Haitao Chu
   Year: 2024
   Final relevance: 0.770
   Citations: 14
   Link: https://doi.org/10.3390/app14093662
   Abstract: Controlling for confounding bias is crucial in causal inference. Causal inference using data from observational studies (e.g., electronic health records) or imperfectly randomized trials (e.g., imperfect randomization or compliance) requires accounting for confounding variables. Many different methods are currently employed to mitigate bias due to confounding. This paper provides a comprehensive review and tutorial of common estimands and confounding adjustment approaches, including outcome regression, g-computation, propensity score, and doubly robust methods. We discuss bias and precision, advantages and disadvantages, and software implementation for each method. Moreover, approaches are illustrated empirically with a reproducible case study. We conclude that different scientific questions are better addressed by certain estimands. No estimand is uniformly more appropriate. Upon selecting an estimand, decisions on which estimator can be driven by performance and available background knowledge.

15. A review and empirical comparison of causal inference methods for clustered observational data with application to the evaluation of the effectiveness of medical devices
   Authors: Guy Cafri, Wei Wang, Priscilla H. Chan, Peter C. Austin
   Year: 2018
   Final relevance: 0.768
   Citations: 29
   Link: https://doi.org/10.1177/0962280218799540
   Abstract: Observational studies are commonplace in medicine. A frequent concern is confounding bias due to differences in patient characteristics across treatment groups, but other important issues include dependency among observations nested within clusters (e.g. patients clustered within physicians or surgeons) and confounding due to cluster characteristics (e.g. physician or surgeon experience or training). Given the frequency with which these issues arise in medical research, as well as their relative complexity, methods for the analysis of clustered observational data are reviewed. We argue for estimating causal treatment effects using marginal models that either match or weight observations using a suitable distance metric (e.g. the propensity score). Simulation results demonstrated that methods incorporating clustering into calculation of the variance were generally more accurate than those that did not. Moreover, methods that account for cluster confounding when estimating the treatment effect were least biased and most accurate. Throughout the paper we illustrate the proposed methods in a medical device setting that compares the effectiveness of femoral heads used in total hip replacements. Whenever possible the clustered aspect of the data should be considered in the design of the study when constructing the distance measure or in the matching process, as well as in the analysis when estimating the variance of the treatment effect.

16. Quantifying the potential role of unmeasured confounders: the example of influenza vaccination
   Authors: Rolf H. H. Groenwold, Arno W. Hoes, Kristin L. Nichol, E. Hak
   Year: 2008
   Final relevance: 0.758
   Citations: 39
   Link: https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyn173
   Abstract: BACKGROUND: The validity of non-randomized studies using healthcare databases is often challenged because they lack information on potentially important confounders, such as functional health status and socioeconomic status. In a study quantifying the effects of influenza vaccination among community-dwelling elderly we assessed whether additional information on not routinely available covariates was indeed associated with exposure to influenza vaccination and could, therefore, have led to residual confounding in healthcare databases. METHODS: We randomly selected 500 persons aged 65 years and older from the computerized Utrecht General Practitioner database. Information on exposure status and on demographics, co-morbidity status, prior healthcare use and medication use was extracted from the database. A questionnaire was used to obtain additional information on not routinely available risk factors [e.g. functional health status (SF-20), smoking status and alcohol consumption]. Missing data from the questionnaire was imputed and multivariable logistic regression analysis was applied to quantify the influence of covariates on the prediction of exposure to influenza vaccination. Within an existing dataset the potential impact of functional health status on the relation between influenza vaccination and mortality was simulated. RESULTS: We obtained questionnaire data from 365 of 500 (73%) subjects. The model including routinely available data from the database appeared accurate in predicting exposure to influenza vaccination (c-statistic 0.86, 95% CI: 0.82-0.89). Functional health status was the only additional characteristic measured with the questionnaire that was not similar in vaccinated and unvaccinated subjects. However, extending the multivariable regression model with functional health status did not significantly improve the prediction of exposure to influenza vaccination, nor did it affect the relation between influenza vaccination and mortality. CONCLUSION: The potential for unmeasured confounding on the association between influenza vaccination and health outcomes as quantified in healthcare databases seems small for non-randomized intervention studies within extensive and reliable databases.

17. Frameworks for estimating causal effects in observational settings: comparing confounder adjustment and instrumental variables
   Authors: Roy S. Zawadzki, Joshua D. Grill, Daniel L. Gillen, and for the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative
   Year: 2023
   Final relevance: 0.756
   Citations: 18
   Link: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12874-023-01936-2
   Abstract: To estimate causal effects, analysts performing observational studies in health settings utilize several strategies to mitigate bias due to confounding by indication. There are two broad classes of approaches for these purposes: use of confounders and instrumental variables (IVs). Because such approaches are largely characterized by untestable assumptions, analysts must operate under an indefinite paradigm that these methods will work imperfectly. In this tutorial, we formalize a set of general principles and heuristics for estimating causal effects in the two approaches when the assumptions are potentially violated. This crucially requires reframing the process of observational studies as hypothesizing potential scenarios where the estimates from one approach are less inconsistent than the other. While most of our discussion of methodology centers around the linear setting, we touch upon complexities in non-linear settings and flexible procedures such as target minimum loss-based estimation and double machine learning. To demonstrate the application of our principles, we investigate the use of donepezil off-label for mild cognitive impairment. We compare and contrast results from confounder and IV methods, traditional and flexible, within our analysis and to a similar observational study and clinical trial.

18. Data integration in causal inference
   Authors: Xu Shi, Ziyang Pan, Wang Miao
   Year: 2022
   Final relevance: 0.753
   Citations: 38
   Link: https://doi.org/10.1002/wics.1581
   Abstract: Integrating data from multiple heterogeneous sources has become increasingly popular to achieve a large sample size and diverse study population. This paper reviews development in causal inference methods that combines multiple datasets collected by potentially different designs from potentially heterogeneous populations. We summarize recent advances on combining randomized clinical trial with external information from observational studies or historical controls, combining samples when no single sample has all relevant variables with application to two-sample Mendelian randomization, distributed data setting under privacy concerns for comparative effectiveness and safety research using real-world data, Bayesian causal inference, and causal discovery methods.

19. De-confounding causal inference using latent multiple-mediator pathways
   Authors: Yubai Yuan, Annie Qu
   Year: 2023
   Final relevance: 0.752
   Citations: 2
   Link: https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2302.05513
   Abstract: Causal effect estimation from observational data is one of the essential problems in causal inference. However, most estimation methods rely on the strong assumption that all confounders are observed, which is impractical and untestable in the real world. We develop a mediation analysis framework inferring the latent confounder for debiasing both direct and indirect causal effects. Specifically, we introduce generalized structural equation modeling that incorporates structured latent factors to improve the goodness-of-fit of the model to observed data, and deconfound the mediators and outcome simultaneously. One major advantage of the proposed framework is that it utilizes the causal pathway structure from cause to outcome via multiple mediators to debias the causal effect without requiring external information on latent confounders. In addition, the proposed framework is flexible in terms of integrating powerful nonparametric prediction algorithms while retaining interpretable mediation effects. In theory, we establish the identification of both causal and mediation effects based on the proposed deconfounding method. Numerical experiments on both simulation settings and a normative aging study indicate that the proposed approach reduces the estimation bias of both causal and mediation effects.

20. Frameworks for Estimating Causal Effects in Observational Settings: Comparing Confounder Adjustment and Instrumental Variables
   Authors: Roy S. Zawadzki, Joshua D. Grill, Daniel L. Gillen
   Year: 2022
   Final relevance: 0.740
   Citations: 0
   Link: https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2209.06984
   Abstract: To estimate causal effects, analysts performing observational studies in health settings utilize several strategies to mitigate bias due to confounding by indication. There are two broad classes of approaches for these purposes: use of confounders and instrumental variables (IVs). Because such approaches are largely characterized by untestable assumptions, analysts must operate under an indefinite paradigm that these methods will work imperfectly. In this tutorial, we formalize a set of general principles and heuristics for estimating causal effects in the two approaches when the assumptions are potentially violated. This crucially requires reframing the process of observational studies as hypothesizing potential scenarios where the estimates from one approach are less inconsistent than the other. While most of our discussion of methodology centers around the linear setting, we touch upon complexities in non-linear settings and flexible procedures such as target minimum loss-based estimation (TMLE) and double machine learning (DML). To demonstrate the application of our principles, we investigate the use of donepezil off-label for mild cognitive impairment (MCI). We compare and contrast results from confounder and IV methods, traditional and flexible, within our analysis and to a similar observational study and clinical trial.

Research Idea Assessment
========================
Assessment: Uncertain
Rationale: Structured verification covered: problem, method, data_or_modality, constraint. All requested components appeared in the inspected evidence, but the complete combination was not confirmed within one paper. Partial structured matches remained for 14 paper(s). Potential title or weak matches remained for 2 paper(s). No complete same-paper match was confirmed.
Counterexamples / direct matches: none confirmed
Partial/contextual support:
- https://openalex.org/W3002694035 (matched: problem, method, constraint)
- https://openalex.org/W2067023747 (matched: problem, method, constraint)
- https://openalex.org/W4200057099 (matched: method, constraint)
- https://openalex.org/W2988802269 (matched: data_or_modality, constraint)
- https://openalex.org/W4323572251 (matched: problem, method, constraint)
- https://openalex.org/W2776872801 (matched: method)
- https://openalex.org/W3129580623 (matched: problem, method, constraint)
- https://openalex.org/W2803986188 (matched: method)
- https://openalex.org/W4289528791 (matched: method)
- https://openalex.org/W2608809317 (matched: problem, constraint)
- https://openalex.org/W2735301415 (matched: constraint)
- https://openalex.org/W2620393362 (matched: method)
- https://openalex.org/W2798958557 (matched: method)
- https://openalex.org/W2144387798 (matched: method)
Potential matches:
- https://openalex.org/W1987125793
- https://openalex.org/W2982188023
Supporting evidence:
- https://openalex.org/W3002694035 (contextual_or_partial_support, research_objective): Identify the average treatment effect under categorical unmeasured confounding using negative control variables and develop robust inference methods
- https://openalex.org/W3002694035 (contextual_or_partial_support, method_or_intervention): General semiparametric framework for inference about the ATE using measured covariates
- https://openalex.org/W3002694035 (contextual_or_partial_support, constraints): Categorical unmeasured confounding
- https://openalex.org/W2067023747 (contextual_or_partial_support, constraints): No unmeasured confounding and positivity for causal inference with complete data
- https://openalex.org/W2067023747 (contextual_or_partial_support, method_or_intervention): Methods based on treatment-assignment, outcome, and missing-data-mechanism models
- https://openalex.org/W4200057099 (contextual_or_partial_support, method_or_intervention): Generalized Bayesian causal effect estimation (GBCEE)
- https://openalex.org/W4200057099 (contextual_or_partial_support, research_objective): Evaluate machine-learning methods for confounder selection and reduction of unmeasured confounding bias
- https://openalex.org/W2988802269 (contextual_or_partial_support, population_or_setting): Large observational datasets including EHR data
Verification searches:
- causal inference causal inference unmeasured confounding observational healthcare data healthcare unmeasured confounding
- causal inference unmeasured confounding causal inference observational healthcare data healthcare unmeasured confounding
- causal inference causal inference unmeasured confounding observational healthcare data unmeasured confounding healthcare
Coverage: Executed 1 direct idea verification queries and retrieved 10 unique papers.
Coverage: Direct verification used structured title/abstract evidence only.
Coverage: Analyzed 19 evidence-bearing papers before direct idea assessment.
Coverage: Some verification papers lacked abstracts; title-only matches were not treated as direct.

Candidate Research Gap Assessments
==================================
No evidence-backed candidate gaps were identified.

Global qualification
--------------------
These assessments describe retrieved and verified evidence only; they do not prove global novelty.

=== PROCESS TIMING ===
Wall time: 2.60 s
CPU user: 1.40 s
CPU system: 0.07 s
Max RSS: 99220 KB
Exit code: 0

Finished: 2026-09-04T15:03:21+09:00
Program exit status: 0
